So the next section is on
functional programming.
This is another style of
development software.
It uses mathematical functions on
an input set to produce an output set.
Now while Java is an object
oriented programming language,
it does provide
the java.util.function package,
which hosts several functional interfaces.
I think this might be all of them,
if none were added recently.
But as you can see,
quite a bit of functional interfaces.
So what is a functional interface anyway?
Well, it's an interface that
has just one abstract method.
And that one method is what lambda
expressions and method references.
Remember, we just talked about those,
it's what they implement.
So again, lambda expressions, well,
method references are a shortcut for
lambda expressions, so same thing, right?
But lambda expressions
are essentially an implementation.
They're anonymous functions, right?
They're an anonymous function
that is the implementation of
the one abstract method within
a functional interface.
So example,
this is a list of countries, yes.
If we wanted to print each country,
we could use the for
each in a lambda expression that
says to print each one out, okay?
The lambda expression is
actually the implementation of
the consumer functional interface
from the java.util package.
So on line 9 here,
this is the consumer interface.
On line 9, we see that this
interface has one abstract
method that accepts
a single input argument and
it returns no result, okay?
This is already in the Java util function
is not anything that I've written,
I just pulled the code.
Specifically, our lambda
expression is the implementation.
The functional interfaces single abstract
method, which in this case is the accept.
So what that is doing,
that c arrow system.out.println/c,
it's saying, hey, make that the
implementation for that abstract method.
So to illustrate this,
I've created a variable called print.
Whose type is consumer.
That's the functional
interface from java.util.
When we call for each and
we pass in this interface,
the implementation that we provided for
accept is what is executed.
So, I said,
the consumer equals c arrow println,
give that whole object to forEach, and
it's basically gonna
just execute that code.
So even without the forEach,
we can call the abstract
method from the consumer interface accept,
right?
So I said, all right,
print as a consumer object, .accept.
That's the abstract method, and
then I can pass in any object and
it's going to use that implementation
that I specified on the first line.
And it's using the hello world as
the input to that abstract method.
Cuz remember it takes a single input.
So in addition to the lambda expression,
we could also use the method reference.
And this will work exactly the same.
So consumer,
that's the example I just showed you.
Of course, there are many more.
These are the core functional interfaces
provided in that java.util package.
So, I'll go through these.
We have consumer we've
already talked about.
We also have supplier.
This returns a value, but
it does not accept any input.
We have predicate which has a function
that accepts one argument as input and
it returns a Boolean value as the output.
We have function which accepts
one argument as input and
then it produces a result.
And then the other two there are specific
types of function operators.
Such as the unary operator, an operation
that accepts a single argument as input,
and then it returns
output of that same type.
So notice with unary,
we have T as the type of input, and
also T as the type that
will be returned back.
So that implies that's the same.
And then binary works kind of the same
way except it takes two parameters,
both of the same type, and it returns
something of that same type, all right?
So the remaining interfaces in this
package, the java.util.function,
package there are specific
variations of these.
So these are the core ones.
Basically, given these and
the variations on them,
the idea here is that
whatever lambda expression
you come up with should meet one of these.
Kind of have a lot of different ones for
you to choose from.
So back to functional interfaces,
in addition to the one abstract method
that's available in every
functional interface,
the interface can also provide default and
static methods.
So we talked about that when we
looked at interfaces, right?
So functional interfaces are no different.
They have that one abstract method, but
they can also include
additional methods as well.
So in this example,
this is the function interface, and
this provides the default
method that's called andThen.
Which will allow you to
perform another operation
on the result from the previous operation.
So here are two separate statements.
We have square,
which uses a lambda expression to
implement the apply method of the function
to return the square of the input.
And then we have add,
which adds the input to itself.
And then it returns the sum, so
we could say first execute square and
then execute add and then we could say
apply all of this, all right?
And when you say apply,
that's when you provide the actual
input that you want it to use.
And apply is the abstract
method in the class, right?
So you give it that input and
you say, all right,
with this input, I want you to
do what I specify for square and
then what's this default method and
then do what I provided for add.
So you would get 50 there.
So while the functional interfaces
in the javautil.function package
cover most of the use
cases that you may have.
You can create your own functional
interface if you just need it to, right?
If none of them fit the bill and you're
doing something really extraordinary,
then you can create your
own functional interface.
It's recommended that you use this
functional interface attribute.
So you would just do add
functional interface and
annotation is what it's called.
So you would annotate this
with a functional interface.
You don't have to, but
it's convention and it'll help you out.
Because Java would then enforce that
you can only have one abstract method,
which, if you wanna be a functional
interface, that's the rule, right?
So, if you had that one abstract method,
then you would
let the implementers know what
are the arguments if there are any.
So in yours you say yeah,
I take three arguments or
whatever, and
then the result that would be returned.
So in this one, you specifically said,
I take three integers and
I return an integer back, right?
And some of those other
interfaces that we looked at,
notice they didn't have a return
type that you were familiar with.
They had things like T and R or whatever.
So these are generic types,
where you can say, I don't really care,
the type of the object,
I'm just gonna leave a placeholder here,,
but, they can give me any object,
and I'm able to deal with it.
Okay, optionally in your own custom
functional interface you can
also include your static and
your default methods if you want.